[GONG]
>>Welcome to my home.
We're aboard the
ferry boat "Vallejo,"
which is tied up at the
north end of Sausalito,
close to San Francisco.
And this is where I live.
And you may think this
place is rather weird.
But that's because I've
always loved weird things.
I remember when I was
a little boy, people
used to say to me,
Alan, you're so weird.
Why can't you be
like other people?
Well, I thought that
was just plain dull,
like having the same thing
for dinner every day.
And as is well said, variety
is the spice of life.
So, you will indeed find
this place rather strange.
And some of the
things that are weird
are weird because
they are just obvious
and nobody ever thinks of them.
Some of the most fascinating
scientific discoveries
have been made by people who
called ordinary common sense
in question.
Like, anybody can see
that the earth is flat,
and people know it's flat.
And calling that fundamental
assumption in question
is really the
beginning of geography.
And when I think
over the weirdest
of all things I can think
of, you know what it is?
Nothing.
The whole idea of
nothing is something
that has bugged people
for centuries, especially
in the West.
Because we have a
saying in Latin,
ex nihilo nihil fit, which
means that out of nothing
comes nothing.
You can't, in other words,
get something out of nothing.
And it's occurred
to me that this
is a fallacy of
tremendous proportions
that lies at the root
of all our common sense,
not only in the West, but in
many parts of the East as well.
And it comes up as a kind of
terror of nothing, a put down
on nothing, on everything to
do with nothing, everything
associated with nothing, such
as sleep, passivity, rest,
and even the feminine
principle is often
equated with the
negative principal.
Although women's lib people
don't like that kind of thing,
but when they get through
understanding what
I'm going to tell you, I
don't think they'll object.
Because what has struck
me is that nothing,
the negative, the empty,
is exceedingly powerful.
I would say, not ex nihilo
nihil fit, out of nothing
comes nothing, but I would
say you can't have something
without nothing.
So, how do we basically
begin to think
about the difference between
something and nothing?
I can say, there is a
cigar in my right hand
and there is no cigar
in my left hand.
And so we get the idea of is
here and isn't, or empty, here.
But behind that, of course, lies
the far more obvious contrast
of solid and space.
Now, we tend to think
of space as nothing.
When we talk about
the conquest of space,
there's a little
element, notice,
of hostility in that phrase.
But actually, we are talking
about the conquest of distance.
Space, as such, that
is to say, whatever
it is that lies between
the earth and the moon,
and the earth and the sun,
is considered, especially
since the Michelson-Morley
experiment, which
proved there was no
ether, is considered
to be just nothing at all.
But to suggest how very powerful
and important this nothing
at all is, let me
point out to you
that if you didn't
have space, you
couldn't have anything solid.
To begin with, without
space outside the solid,
you wouldn't know where
the solid's edges were.
For example, you can
see me on the camera
because you see a background
here and all around me.
And that background
shows up my outline.
But if that wasn't
there, then you
would notice, say, only the
beads and the microphone here.
And this would become
the background.
But you always have to have
a background to see a figure.
You just can't do without it.
So that means that the figure
and the ground, the solid
and the space, in some way are
inseparable and go together.
Now, we find this very
commonly in the phenomenon
of magnetism and electricity.
A magnet has a north
pole and a south pole.
And a battery has a positive
pole and a negative pole.
There is no such thing as a
magnet with one pole only.
That's supposing we equate north
with south and-- north with
"is" and south with "isn't."
Then we see we can't do
without the two of them.
You can chop the magnet in two,
supposing it's a bar magnet,
and you'll just get another
north pole and south
pole on the end of each piece.
And so, in the
same way, a current
will not flow through
an electric circuit
until the negative
pole is connected
as well as the positive.
Because the current does not
wait in the wire like water
in a hose and then begin to
flow when you, as it were,
connect it with the
negative pole like turning
on the nozzle.
There won't be any
current in the wire at all
until its endpoint, which is
the negative, is established.
So, what this is trying to get
into our basic logic is this.
That there isn't a sort of fight
between something and nothing.
You know the famous
words of Hamlet,
to be or not to be,
that is the question.
It isn't.
To be or not to be
is not the question.
Because, as I think
I've shown, you
can't have a solid
without space.
And therefore you
can't have an "is"
without an "isn't," a
something without a nothing,
a figure without a background.
And we can turn that
right the other way around
and say you can't have
space without solid.
Because imagine
nothing but space.
Space, space, space, with
nothing in it at all, forever.
But there you are imagining it.
And you are something in it.
To have the whole idea of there
being only space and nothing
else at all is not
only inconceivable
but perfectly meaningless.
Because we always know
what we mean by contrasts.
We know what we mean by white
in comparison with black.
We know life in
comparison with death.
We know pleasure in comparison
with pain, up in comparison
with down.
But you will notice
of all these things
that they must come
into being together.
You don't have first
something and then nothing,
or first nothing
and then something.
Something and nothing are
two sides of the same coin.
And as you know,
if you take a coin
and you file away
the tails side of it,
and you file that side
of it away completely,
the head side will
disappear as well.
So, in this sense, the
positive and the negative,
the something and the
nothing are inseparable.
They go together.
And in this way you could
say that the nothing
is the force whereby the
something can be manifested.
Without space, we could
not see the stars.
The stars not only
occupy space but have
space between one point of the
sphere and the opposite point.
So the space everywhere
is absolutely
basic to there being
anything at all.
Now, ordinarily
we think that what
is basic to the physical world
is something we call matter.
And then matter
has various shapes.
We think of tables
as made of wood.
We think of pots
as made of clay.
But I ask you, is a tree
made of wood in the same way
as a table is?
No, that would be
stupid, isn't it?
Because a tree is wood.
It isn't made of wood.
Wood and tree are two different
names for the same thing.
But there's in the back
of our mind the notion,
as a root of common sense,
that everything in the world
is made of something, made
of some kind of basic stuff.
And physicists
through the centuries
have, of course, wanted
to know what that was.
And physics began as a quest
to discover the basic stuff out
of which the world is made.
And with all our advances in
physics, we've never found it.
What we have found is
not stuff, but form.
We have found shapes.
We have found structures.
Because when you turn
up the microscope
and you look at things,
where you thought
there was some
sort of stuff, you
find instead form,
pattern, structure.
You find the shapes of crystals.
And you go in beyond
the shapes of crystals
and you find molecules.
And you go in beyond
molecules and you find atoms.
And you go in
beyond atoms and you
find electrons and
positrons, between which
there are vast spaces.
And we can't make up our
minds as to these electrons,
whether they're waves or
whether they're particles.
And so we call them wavicles.
But they're very tiny.
And if you want to ask what
stuff are electrons made,
of we might be able to
make a further analysis,
but what we will come up
with will never be stuff;
it will always be a pattern,
a moving pattern which
can be described and measured.
But we never get to any
stuff, for the simple reason
that there isn't any.
You see what stuff is, actually,
is when you see something
unclearly or out of
focus, it becomes fuzzy.
We could say stuffing
in something,
like kapok in a cushion,
or stuffed like clay.
Because when we look at
it with the naked eye
it looks just like goo.
We can't make out any
significant shape to it.
But then when you put it
down on the microscope
you suddenly see shapes.
It comes into clear
focus as shape.
And you can go on
and on and on looking
into the nature of the
world, and you will never
find anything except form.
Because, think of stuff.
Why, you wouldn't
know how to talk
about it even if you found it.
How would you describe
what it was like?
You couldn't say anything
about a structure in it.
You couldn't say anything about
a pattern or a process in it
because it would be just
absolute primordial goo.
Well, what else is there
besides form in the world?
Obviously, between the
shape, the significant shapes
of any form, there is space.
And space and form,
in that sense,
go together as the
fundamental things
we're dealing with
in this universe.
And that's why there's
a Buddhist saying.
Really, the whole
of Buddhism is based
on this saying, which is "that
which is void is precisely form
and that which is form
is precisely void."
Let me illustrate this to you
in an extremely simple way.
When you use the word clarity,
what do you mean by clarity?
What's the first thing you
think of when I say clarity?
Well, it might be a perfectly
polished lens, or mirror,
or a clear day when
there's no smog and the air
is perfectly
transparent like space.
Now, what's the next thing
you think of, clarity?
The next thing you think
of is form in clear focus.
All the details
articulate and perfect.
So the one word,
clarity, suggests to you
these two apparently completely
opposite things: the clarity
of the lens or the mirror and
the clarity of articulate form.
And it is in the
sense, then, you see,
that the Buddhists say
form is void, void is form.
Or we could put
it in another way.
Instead of saying is
we could say implies.
Or the word that I invented,
goeswith, spelled all in one.
Like a front goeswith a back.
A male goeswith a
female, and so on.
So form always goeswith void.
And there really isn't, in
this whole universe, any stuff.
Form, indeed, is inseparable
from the idea of energy.
And frisky form,
especially when it's
moving in a very circumscribed
area, appears to us as solid.
In the same way, for example,
when you spin an electric fan,
the empty spaces
between the blades
sort of disappear into a blur.
And you can't push a pencil,
much less your finger,
through the fan.
So in the same way, you
can't push your finger
through the floor because
the floor's going too fast.
But basically, what
you have down there
is nothing except nothing,
and form in motion.
I know there was a physicist
at the University of Chicago.
He was rather crazy,
like some scientists.
And this impressed him so much,
the insolidity, the instability
of the physical
world, that he used
to go around in enormous
padded slippers for fear
he should fall
through the floor.
But here it is, this common
sense notion that the world is
made of some kind
of stuff is shown
to be a nonsense idea in
the back of our minds.
It isn't there at all.
But instead, form and emptiness.
Now, we all know that energy
is always vibration, pulsation.
Whether it be the energy of
light or the energy of sound,
it's always on and off.
And in the case
of light, say you
get very fast light,
very strong light, even,
say, with alternating
current, you
don't notice the discontinuity
because your retina retains
the impression of the on pulse.
And so that carries over
during the off pulse.
And you don't
notice the off pulse
except in a slow light
like an arc lamp.
And it's exactly the
same thing with sound.
When you hear a high
note that goes oh, it
seems much more continuous.
That's because the vibrations
are faster than a low note,
as when I go ah.
Now, in that you can hear
a kind of grainy-ness.
And that grainy-ness
is because you
are hearing the rapid
alternations of on and off
on a lower note, so that all
wave motion is this process.
And it's curious, isn't
it, when we think of waves,
and talk about waves, we
think about the crests.
We think about this point.
And we say that is waves.
And that is because
the crests stand out
from the underlying uniform bed
of water, which is relatively
solid in comparison
with the space
above, so that these
crests are perceived
as the things, the
forms, the waves.
But isn't it obvious that you
cannot have the ups without
the downs?
You could call-- you see you
get this dividing line here
between above and below.
Now, isn't it
obvious, first of all,
you cannot have the emphasis,
called a crest, the concave,
without the deemphasis, or
convex, called the trough.
They necessarily go
with one another.
So as to have anything standing
out, there must be, as it were,
something standing
down, or standing back.
So in this way, we must
realize that if you
had this part alone, the
up part, that would not
excite your senses in
any way because there
would be no contrast.
In other words, when
sound comes upon your ear,
the eardrum vibrates.
When the on pulse
of the sound comes,
the eardrum is
driven in a little.
When the off succeeds, the
eardrum comes out again.
And so the eardrum wiggles.
If you just pushed it in
uniformly and left it there,
you wouldn't hear anything.
In the same way, if
there is no sound
and the eardrum is not
being pushed at all,
you have silence.
But to have sound, you
must have the alternation
of sound, silence, sound,
silence, sound, silence.
And so you get that ah which you
can hear on a very deep note.
Now, the same thing is
true of all life together.
We shouldn't really contrast
existence with non-existence,
because, actually, existence
is the alternation of to be
and not to be, of positive
or negative, of on and off.
So, you could say
existence is eternal,
if we are to consider existence
as this alternation of now you
see it, now you
don't, now you see it,
now you don't, now you
see it, now you don't.
It is that contrast
that presents
the sensation of there
being anything at all.
Now, in light and
sound, these waves
are extraordinarily
rapid so that we
don't hear the
interval between them.
But there are
other circumstances
in which the waves are
extraordinarily slow,
as in the alternation
of day and night,
light and darkness, and the
much vaster alternations of life
and death, of the great
slow cycles of the world.
But these alternations
are just as
necessary to the
being of the universe
as in the very fast motions
where we get it in light,
and in sound, and in the sense
of solid contact, where it's
going so rapidly that we noticed
the continuity, or the is side,
and we ignore the intervention
of the isn't side.
But it's there just the same.
Just as there are vast
spaces within the very heart
of the atom.
Now, another thing that
goes along with all this
is that it's perfectly
obvious that the universe is
a system which is
aware of itself.
In other words, we,
as living organisms,
are forms of the
energy of the universe
just as much as the
stars and the galaxies.
And through our sense
organs, this system of energy
becomes aware of itself.
But there's a puzzle in this,
which again relates back
to our basic contrast
between on and off,
and something and
nothing, which is this.
That the aspect of the universe
which is aware of itself,
that is to say,
the aspect which,
to put it in a very clumsy
phrase, does the awaring,
does not see itself.
In other words, you can't look
at your eyes with your eyes.
You can't kiss your own lips.
You can't bite your own teeth.
You can't observe yourself
in the act of observing.
All scientists,
neurologists, physicists,
have wanted to do that,
but they can't do it.
Just as you can't touch
the tip of this finger
with the tip of this finger,
no matter how hard you try.
And that therefore
creates, on the backside
of all observation,
a blank spot.
Just, for example,
as behind your eyes,
from the point of view of your
eyes, however you look around,
there is blankness behind them.
That's the unknown.
That's the part of the universe,
in other words, which does not
see itself because it is seeing.
And so we always get this
division of experience
into one half known,
one half unknown.
We would like-- of course,
it would be fascinating
if we could know
the always unknown.
But if we, say, examine
the brain and the structure
of the nerves behind
the eyes, we're
always looking at somebody
else's brain out there.
We're never looking at our
own brain at the same time
as we're investigating
somebody else's brain.
So there always remains this
blank side of experience.
Now, what I'm suggesting
to you is this.
That the blank
side of experience
has the same relationship
to the conscious side
as the off principle
of vibration
has to the on principle.
Do you see that?
There's a fundamental division.
The Chinese call them--
the positive side, the yang
and the negative side, the yin.
That corresponds to the idea of
one, in our language, and zero.
All numbers can be
made of one zero.
That's called binary arithmetic,
which is used for computers.
And so it's all made up of
off and on, and therefore
equally of conscious
and unconscious.
But the unconscious
is, so to say,
the part of experience which
is doing consciousness,
just as the trough
manifests the wave,
the space manifests the
solid, the background
manifests the figure.
And so all that side
of life which you call
unconscious,
unknown, impenetrable
is unconscious, and
is unknown, and is
impenetrable because
it's really you.
In other words, the deepest
you is the nothing side,
is the side which
you don't know.
So in this sense, don't
be afraid of nothing.
I could make a joke
and say there's
nothing in nothing
to be afraid of.
But people in our culture
are terrified of nothing.
They are terrified of death.
They are uneasy about
sleep because they
think it's a waste of time.
And they have a lurking fear
in the back of their minds
that all this
universe is eventually
going to run down
and end in nothing.
And it will all be
forgotten, buried, and dead.
But this is a completely
unreasonable fear
because it is just
precisely this nothing which
is always the
source of something.
Think of it, once again,
in the image of clarity.
We say crystal clear.
Nothing is what brings
something into focus.
And this nothingness,
symbolized by the crystal,
is your own eyeball,
your own consciousness,
and the clear space in
which all the stars have
freedom to be seen.
[DRUMBEATS]